                         Can't Buy Me Love:
A Field Experiment Exploring the Tradeoff Between Income and Caste
                 in the Indian Matrimonial Market

                                       Subhasish Dugar
                                      University of Calgary

                                     Haimanti Bhattacharya
                                      University of Utah

                                        David Reiley
                         University of Arizona and Yahoo! Research♣

                                  Preliminary Draft: May 2008

Abstract: This study attempts to measure discriminatory preferences using a field
experiment in an established matrimonial market in India. Indian marriages exhibit
strong marital segregation along caste lines, and grooms typically advertise their income
in matrimonial advertisements. This combination yields an ideal opportunity to measure
discriminatory preferences in terms of foregone financial opportunities. We place
matrimonial ads in a leading Bengali language newspaper on behalf of fictitious potential
grooms. We systematically control caste and income characteristics of these grooms in
order to measure substitution between these two attributes on the part of respondents.
Responses from potential brides confirm a strong “own caste” preference, as brides
respond more often to their own caste than to other castes. However, inter-caste
responses, which constitute a significant proportion of the total responses, give us a
measure of these discriminatory preferences in terms of groom’s income. In particular,
we find that the group of highest-caste brides sends an average of 1.6 additional
responses for every 1000-rupee increase in the monthly income of a lower-caste groom.
Discriminatory preferences are so strong that even a quadrupling of income is not enough
to make up for a one-level caste difference between grooms. Extrapolating out of sample
from our data, we estimate that an eightfold difference in income might be required to
make up for the difference in response rates by potential brides. These results indicate
that affirmative action policies in India, which seek to enhance the income of the lower-
caste population, are not likely to produce any significant change in inter-caste marriage.


Keywords: Marriage Market, Discrimination, Field Experiment.

JEL Classification: J12, J15, C93.


♣
  Dugar: Department of Economics, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive, N.W., SS 454, Calgary,
T2N 1N4, Canada (email: sdugar@ucalgary.ca); Bhattacharya: Department of Economics, University of
Utah, 1645 E. Campus Center Dr. Rm. 308 Salt Lake City, UT, 84112 (email: hb2267@columbia.edu);
Reiley: Department of Economics, University of Arizona, 401CC, McClelland Hall, Tucson, AZ, 85721
(reiley@eller.arizona.edu). The usual disclaimer applies.
1        Introduction

         Strong discriminatory preference pervades many spheres of life. Recent research

indicates that it significantly influences choice of a marriage partner (Fisman et al., 2008,

2006; Levin et al., 2007; Wang and Kao, 2007; Hitsch et al., 2006). For example, Fisman

et al. (2008) study mate selection behavior in a Speed Dating experiment, involving

students from Columbia University, and observe that females of all races strongly

discriminate on the basis of race unlike their male counterparts. They detect strong racial

preferences even in a relatively progressive population, and thus conclude that

discriminatory preferences are most likely to play a crucial role in yielding significantly

low inter-racial marriages in the U.S. Using data from the U.S. Census for 1880-2000,

Fryer (2007) documents that interracial marriage rates for whites, blacks and Asians have

trended up in last few decades, even though the absolute rates are still minuscule. Hitsch

et al. (2006) find evidence of strong endogamy (marrying within a group) using online

dating data. Kurzban and Weeden (2005) illustrate the presence of same race preferences.

A number of surveys (Mills et al., 1995; Mok, 1999) also reveal the same negative

attitude toward inter-racial relationships among men and women.

         While these studies document overwhelming absence of inter-group preferences

in marriage markets, a few studies (e.g., Fisman et al., 2008; Fryer, 2007; Hitsch et al.,

2006) scrutinize important role of determinants of such preferences1. These studies

uncover a set of exogenous covariates such as age, residential location, education, veteran

status, physical attributes, and demonstrate their specific role in explaining the choice of

1
 There exists a large literature in psychology, sociology, and anthropology that explores impacts of various
mate attributes on marital preferences. See Buss (2003) for a comprehensive survey of these findings.
Additionally, a strand of literature deals with structural estimation of mate preferences using data on final
matches (see Choo and Siow, 2006; Bisin et al., 2004; Wong, 2003). In contrast, this study uses data on
mate selection decisions than final matches.


                                                     2
an inter-group partner. For instance, Fryer (2007) finds that higher level of education had

become an important determinant of interracial marriage by the end of the twentieth

century. Barring these studies, there is not much research that attempts to understand

empirically what factors may reinforce or weaken such discriminatory preferences for

potential mate selection. Identifying the distinct role of these determinants would deepen

our understanding of such preference in this enormously vital territory of human

behavior.

        Against this backdrop, this study explores how economic incentives influence

discriminatory mate selection preference in the context of a well-functioning matching

market. Specifically, we investigate if relatively higher income of a discriminated agent

(e.g., potential inter-group male partner) can plausibly overcome biased preference of a

discriminator (e.g., females) in the context of a marriage market?                           Or is this

discriminatory preference large enough to offset substantial income brought in by a

prospective inter-group individual? Does there exist some level of substitutability

between these two components (i.e., income and biased preference)? What are the

magnitudes, if any, of these potential trade-offs? Beyond these questions, our

understanding of the exchange process of characteristics on both sides of a marriage

market is also quite limited. How do agents in such a market attempt to trade attributes to

strike a match? Our study also sheds light on this particular process by exploiting the

features of the market in which we conduct our study. In contrast, studies by Fishman et

al. (2008, 2006) and Hitsch et al. (2006) do not concentrate on trade-off between an

important mate attribute (i.e., income) and such preference2.


2
 Becker (1973, p. 12) shows that the incentive to marry positively correlates with income potential of each
agent in a marriage market. Psychologists have long studied the determinants of mate selection using


                                                    3
        The principal research question of this study can be construed to comprehend a

basic principle in economics: the interactive relationship between economic incentives

and agents’ preferences in a specific market context. The relationship can be understood

by appealing to Becker (1957). The basic idea is that individuals can have tastes for

discrimination against members of certain demographic groups in terms of mate selection

process, however this discrimination may not necessarily be infinite. In that case a

discriminatory agent may still choose a mate from the other group as long as the net

income of the out-group member is strictly higher than the net (or gross) income of an in-

group member (holding other marriage market characteristics fixed). Thus discriminatory

agents may trade off disutility (of marrying someone outside his/her own group) for

higher income3.

        However, from the description of some of the results in the introductory

paragraph, it may appear that the tastes of agents are so overwhelmingly biased in favor

of discrimination that, relatively, the economic incentives are of only minor or no

importance. For example, if the discriminatory preferences in agents were large, then it

would lead to complete segregation in a marriage market (Becker; 1957, p.22). Akerlof

(1976, p.609) in contrast maintains that discriminatory incentives may well respond to

economic stimuli. Existing theories in sociology (Kalmijn, 1993; Blau, 1964; Merton,

1941) too extend support to such substitution between biased preferences and

characteristics valuable from the standpoint of a marriage market. Specifically, these

survey method, and one general finding is that women place greater emphasis on earning potential of men
when seeking long-term relationships (Regan et al., 2000; Stewart et al., 2000). Hitsch et al. (2006) also
corroborate this particular finding.
3
  Becker (1957) introduces the concept of a discrimination coefficient (d) that measures the extent of
discrimination against a particular group, and the magnitude of d may provide an estimate of monetary
compensation (e.g., in form of extra income) needed by a discriminatory individual in order to engage in a
plausible trading relationship with a member of the discriminated group. See Becker (1957, p.14) for
similar examples.


                                                    4
theories state that there exists some substitutability between the value of an agent in a

marriage market, determined by that agent’s characteristics, and the cost of marrying an

agent with such characteristics. The theoretical predictions from this strand of models

would envisage in our framework that in equilibrium agents with discriminatory

preferences may marry a minority group member in exchange for superior characteristics

possessed by that minority group member. Given the disagreement linked to differing

views on whether such substitutability may be present or not, it is natural to wonder about

the real effects of income incentives on such preferences. Our study permits a direct test

of this conjecture.

        Data limitations however make it difficult to empirically test these questions4. To

circumvent this difficulty and exploit the advantages of a naturalistic environment, we

conduct a field experiment that builds on the correspondence testing methodology that

has been previously used to understand minority outcomes in the U.S. and the U.K.

(Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004; Riach and Rich, 1991; Brown and Gay, 1985; Jowell

and Prescott-Clarke, 1970). In particular, the market that we use as a testbed to examine

these questions is a leading Bengali language newspaper in the state of West Bengal,

India that publishes matrimonial advertisements on a regular basis5. Majority of the

leading dailies in India publish several columns of such advertisements on a particular

day, and mostly parents having marriageable sons or daughters place these

4
  In principle, we could shed light on the research question by using inter-group marriage register data.
However, with this approach we would not have access to the corresponding income data, and as a result
we cannot identify the trade-off between income and discriminatory preference. Moreover even if this data
were available, we need to systematically control the income and other marital attributes of individuals in
order to obtain a precise idea about this trade-off, which we cannot carry out in a natural setting unless
appropriate controls are implemented. These requirements rule out the use of marriage data, and necessitate
a filed experiment.
5
   Newspapers have long provided effective channels through which individuals search for marriage
partners in India and elsewhere (Ahuvia and Adelman, 1992; Lynn and Bolig, 1985; Reddy, 1978; Gist,
1953).


                                                    5
advertisements. The characteristics most commonly mentioned in these advertisements

are caste, age, height, education, occupation, income, physical appearance, and financial

status of a family6. So this market furnishes us with an opportunity to investigate the

trade-off hypothesis by controlling income and other characteristic of individuals.

         In order to examine the trade-off hypothesis, we require an indicator of

discrimination, and the caste-based Indian society provides an ideal setting where caste of

an individual is a proxy for statistical discrimination and, additionally, a parameter of

social status (Deshpande, 2000; Rao, 1992; Scoville, 1991; Dumont, 1980). The Hindu

society is historically divided primarily into four mutually exclusive, exhaustive,

hereditary, and endogamous castes; moreover recent research concerning Indian marriage

system indicates that same-caste marriage is essentially universal (Deolalikar and Rao,

1998; Driver, 1984; Reddy and Rajanna, 1984)7. Available empirical evidence thus

suggests that there may exist very little or no substitutability between caste status and

income8. Thus, a strong intra-caste marital preference coupled with a well-functioning

matrimonial market offers a rich environment for testing our main research question.


6
  Despite the widespread use of newspapers as a medium of mate selection, there may exist a belief that
persons who use personal ads are somehow different from the population at large. But there is little
evidence to support this view, and there are several reasons for rejecting it. See Lynn and Bolig (1985) and
Austrom and Hanel (1983) for comprehensive evidence on this issue. Moreover, the newspaper that we use
for our study has been in circulation for more than hundred years, is the most widely circulated newspaper
in India within that language, and has been carrying these ads for a long time. Also, matrimonial
advertisements that appear in this newspaper differ significantly in scope and purpose from those of regular
personal advertisements. For example, since parents insert these ads for their marriageable sons and
daughters, therefore these ads are more serious in nature than just finding a partner for casual short-term
relationship. We defer a detailed discussion on this issue until the next section.
7
  However there exists a clear incentive for lower caste females to marry upper caste males to gain caste
status since husband’s caste determines that of the wife and children. On the other hand, upper caste
females would lose their caste status if they were to marry lower caste males (Rao and Rao, 1980; Avasthi,
1979).
8
   Anderson (2003) formulates a theory that shows that in caste-based societies, an increase in wealth
dispersion leads to an increase in dowry payments, whereas in non-caste-based societies similar increase in
wealth dispersion has no real effect on dowry payments. This increase in dowry payments is caused by, in
conjunction with an increase in wealth levels of heterogeneous groups in the caste-based society,


                                                     6
         Finally to operationalize our experiment, we create nine unique matrimonial

advertisements, each corresponding to a distinct groom type9. These grooms belong to

one of the three blocks of advertisements, where each block contains three fictitious

grooms from a given caste group. To experimentally manipulate the perception of caste,

we consider three different caste groups, high (Brahmins), medium (Kayasthas) and low

(Namasudras), strictly ranked in order of societal status in the state. To methodically vary

the income characteristic of each groom within a block, we consider three different

monthly income levels (i.e., high, medium, and low) that are considered appropriate in

the study region. Thus we construct advertisements for nine distinct grooms who differ

either in monthly income (within a block) or in caste status (across a block), while

controlling the assignment of other characteristics appropriate for this particular matching

market10. We post these advertisements in two different editions of the same newspaper

with sufficient time gap; measure responses from prospective brides’ families for each

groom type, and thus cast light on the research hypothesis.

         Our choice of this specific marketplace is prompted by the following three

factors. First, for our purpose we require a matching market that should meet two

essential criteria – (1) a market where we could systematically control the income and

other characteristics of potential grooms, and (2) participants in that market must already

exhibit a strong intra-group marital sorting preference. The matrimonial market that we

employ in this study meets the above two conditions. (1) is important. Since two potential

willingness of lower caste females to pay higher monetary compensations to potential higher caste grooms
who can be ranked by their earnings. Rao (1993) provides a “marriage squeeze” argument to explain the
rising price of husbands in modern India, and supports his argument with survey data.
9
  Since in Indian caste-based society a male does not experience a loss of his caste membership even if he
marries outside his own caste group, therefore posting advertisements on behalf of potential brides would
not shed light on the research hypothesis that we are primarily interested in. As a result, we decided to post
advertisements on behalf of potential grooms.
10
   We defer the discussion of how we construct these advertisements until the next section.


                                                      7
grooms from two different castes that appear similar (except their caste status) to

researchers may look very different to prospective brides. So any matching market

outcomes along the line of own-caste preference could just as easily be attributed to

differences in other characteristics (and not the caste dimension) that are observable to

prospective brides but unobservable to researchers. However, if researchers could

methodically control such other characteristics of grooms, then any difference in

marriage market outcomes could be attributed with much confidence to the manipulation

of either the caste or the income features of grooms.

       Second, since subjects of our experiment are not aware that they are being

studied, this aspect of our experiment allows us to avoid many of the demand

characteristics and impression management that may arise in other environments, and

possibly affect research outcomes. The market we choose affords us to avoid such

pitfalls. Third, conjunction of an exceptionally strong discriminatory preference for mate

selection and a reputable market for matrimonial advertisements presents us with a

unique opportunity to put our research questions to a rigorous test.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the experimental

design; section 3 presents the main results. In the last section, we discuss possible

interpretations of our results, how our results trace back to different marriage market

theories, and finally conclude.

2      Experimental Design

       2.1 Construction of the Advertisements

       The main task of the experimental design is to construct advertisements for the

potential grooms that are to be sent to the newspaper. The objective is to produce a set of




                                             8
advertisements that must be representative of the ones that actually appear in that

newspaper. To achieve this goal, we collected 2777 actual advertisements from various

randomly selected editions of the same newspaper (over a course of four months), posted

on behalf of potential grooms seeking responses from prospective brides11. This would

help us identify a set of mean groom characteristics such as age, height, education,

physical appearance, job, and income that can approximately inform the construction

process of our set of advertisements. More importantly, compilation of the actual

advertisements would provide us with a realistic estimate of mean monthly income of a

typical potential groom in this market to which we can anchor the income figures that we

will actually use in the fictitious advertisements.

        Tables 1A and 1B report the summary statistics, by each caste group, of the

advertisements compiled from the newspaper. Several observations are in order. First,

there are no major differences in terms of mean height and age across the caste groups.

Second, the aggregate mean monthly income is approximately Rs. 15858 (on average 45

percent of all postings mention an income figure); the mean income positively correlates

with societal rank of a caste, and this correlation is in close agreement with Deshpande

(2001). The mean income for each caste group in addition displays a high degree of

variance, and our experimental design exploits this specific feature of the market. Recall

that the primary goal of the design is to construct advertisements for potential grooms

that must differ notably from each other in terms of monthly income and in addition,
11
   On average 1000 advertisements are published on every Sunday in this newspaper. Advertisements (both
potential grooms and brides) from a specific caste group are generally clubbed together. So it is safe to
presume that a potential bride or groom’s family (from a given caste group) that is looking for an ideal
match from any caste group may glance through all the ads published in that section of the newspaper. A
typical ad runs for three to four very short lines that contain the previously mentioned information. Since
the newspaper charges on the basis of total number of words put in an ad, people generally try to keep an
ad very short and precise. Hence it does not take a lot of time for a reader to go through a series of such
ads.


                                                    9
advertisements with considerably high or low monthly incomes must appear quite

realistic12. The high dispersion in actual income data helps us achieve the last objective

by assuring us that in this market such advertisements appear on a regular basis. Third, a

significant percentage of these advertisements mention age, height, education, nature of

the job, and physical attribute. In case of education, mostly the name of a degree (e.g.,

B.A., B.Sc., B.Tech., M.A. etc.) is mentioned as a proxy for educational achievement,

and approximately half of the times a field of study is associated with the degree. Fourth,

a surprisingly higher percentage of these potential grooms hold a government job, which

is easily understandable since jobs in the public sector offer much desirable employment

security in many developing countries (Frank and Lewis, 2004).

         The collected information supplies essential structural inputs into our

advertisement production process. To initiate this process, at the outset we chose the

following three different caste groups - Brahmins, Kayasthas, and Namasudras for our

fictitious grooms13. Each of our chosen caste groups belongs to only one of the three

main castes, namely, Brahmins, Kshattriyas and Sudras, respectively14. These caste


12
   If actual incomes of prospective grooms n this market did not exhibit some variability, then this would
have ruled out this market as a potential testing ground for our income-preference trade off hypothesis. In
that case, grooms with either very low or high income would stand out as outliers, and thus introduce a
major flaw in the design. However the highly variable income data alleviate such concerns. One may also
suspect that advertisements that mention grooms’ incomes do so because these grooms have higher than
average earnings generally found in that state. High frequency of considerably low income figures reported
in these ads dismisses this view as well (see Figure 1).
13
   A person’s last name often carries the identity of the caste he or she belongs to. But in many parts of
India, a person’s name (first or last) is not a conclusive indicator of the caste identity (unlike West Bengal).
However, if a person is named in the traditional way, it is often possible to identify his or her caste from the
last name (Ramu, 1977).
14
    The ancient Hindu society is divided into four main endogamous caste groups, namely, Brahmins,
Kshattriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. Since each main caste is further sub-divided into several subcastes and
there exists a host of surnames for each of these castes and subcastes (Deshpande, 2001; Gangopadhyay,
1964), we decided to indicate only the main caste of a fictitious groom in the advertisement and not the last
name. 69 percent of all the actual advertisements that we collected indicate only the caste of a groom, and
not the last name. Even though the Hindu marriage system prevents marriages across main castes, but a
marriage between two individuals coming from two different subcastes (from the same main caste) is


                                                      10
groups are similar with respect to their cultural and social behavior, except the societal

rank in the state of West Bengal (Harlan and Courtright, 1995). So the reported

segregation in marriage markets in West Bengal can mostly be attributed to

discriminatory preferences, and not to any cultural differences across these caste groups.

Our choice of these specific caste groups has been prompted by three main reasons. First,

each of the included caste group in our design has an unambiguous social ranking in the

study region. Brahmins are at the top of the caste hierarchy in the state followed by

Kayasthas, and Namasudras15. Second, marriages among these caste groups have been

claimed to be practically non-existent, thus will allow a rigorous test of our main research

hypothesis (Corwin, 1977; Gangopadhyay, 1964). Third, each caste group is numerously

present in the state, and therefore any tendency to marry across caste lines may not be

driven by pure supply side effects (The Census of India, 2001)16.

         We manufacture a total of three blocks of advertisements. Each block contains

three grooms from a given caste group. To systematically manipulate the income

characteristic of these three grooms within a block, we consider the following three



permitted (Davis, 1941). Therefore, our design does not exclude any potentially interested subcaste group
(within a caste) from responding to our advertisement for a particular groom, and at the same time this
choice avoids the complexity that may arise from web of subcastes and the consequent surnames.
15
   Namasudras are one of the major scheduled castes (SCs) in West Bengal, according to the 2001 Census
of India. SCs, which sit at the bottom of the caste-hierarchy, are generally communities that were explicitly
recognized by the Constitution of India in 1950 as requiring special support to overcome centuries of
discrimination by mainstream Hindu society (Holla, 2007). The total population of West Bengal at 2001
Census has been 80,176,197. Of these 18,452,555 persons are SCs, constituting 23 per cent of the total
population of the state. There are 59 notified SCs, and all have been enumerated in 2001 Census. The
Rajbanshi and Namasudra having more than 3.2 millions population each; together these two groups
constitute 35.8 per cent of the total SC population in the state. For an extensive discussion on Namasudras
in the West Bengal, see Bandopadhyay (1997).
16
    The relative supply of each included caste group in West Bengal may potentially affect inter-caste
marriage rates. For example, the Namasudras may be more likely to marry outside their own caste because
they make up only a small fraction of the total population of West Bengal. In other words, many of their
marriage prospects are non-Namasudras. However, we contend that their sheer presence, in absolute
number (3,212,393 according to The Census of India, 2001), is large enough to discard any such supply
side argument. We discuss more on this issue in the next section.


                                                    11
monthly income levels – high (Rs.35,000), medium (Rs.15,000) and low (Rs.7,000). We

assign these three income figures to the three potential grooms within a block, one for

each. This assignment process therefore results in a total of nine grooms, divided equally

into three caste groups (or blocks), and each groom within a group differs from the other

two in terms of monthly income. The main advantage of our chosen monthly income

levels is that they are dissimilar enough to produce a large effect (in terms of response

received from the other side of the market) to be at least in principle observable in

response data.

         To arrive at these income figures, we utilize the distribution of monthly income of

actual grooms advertised in various editions of the newspaper, as shown in Figure 1.

These income figures were reported either in monthly form or in annual form. We

computed the monthly figures from the annual figures whenever necessary. We employ

Rs. 15,000 as the medium monthly income level (an approximation of the aggregate mean

monthly income of Rs. 15,858, see Table 1) in our design around which we manipulate

the low and high-income levels. A close inspection of Figure 1 reveals that increasingly

fewer incomes occur toward the upper tail of the distribution, and there are very few

observations in excess of Rs. 35,000 (this pattern is valid across each caste group in the

monthly income data, which we do not report here). As a result, we choose Rs. 35,000 as

the high monthly income level in our design. In the lower tail of the income distribution,

most observations fall in the range of Rs. 4,000 – Rs. 10,000. We choose the mid-point of

this range, that is, Rs. 7,000 as the low monthly income level17.


17
   We planned to experiment with a range of income figures (for each level) before posting our ads with
these ones. Since we were not sure which income figures might elicit inter-caste responses, if any, this was
our strategy. However since the two batches of advertisements elicited considerable number of inter-caste
responses, we decided to stick with these figures only and did not pursue with other figures.


                                                    12
        As a check of appropriateness of our income figures, we conducted a survey in

the three districts (i.e., Kolkata, Howrah, and Birbhum) in West Bengal. The first two

districts represent a combination of urban and semi-urban areas whereas the last district is

mostly composed of semi-urban and rural areas. According to the income indices

computed by the Executive Summary, West Bengal Human Development Record

(WBHDR, 2004), Kolkata is economically the most affluent (the index value is 0.73) and

Birbhum is the most impoverished (0.27), and Howrah (0.53) lies in between. These

districts were chosen to reflect perceptions of individuals, belonging to various income

categories, about “what constitutes a low, medium, or high income level for a

marriageable male in the state of West Bengal”. Each responder was shown a list of

income intervals, and was asked to mark one of them that he/she thinks a

low/medium/high income marriageable male in the state should belong to. There were

three separate questions for the three income levels, and each responder had to choose

only one income interval for each income level. The shown income intervals ranged

between Rs. 2,000 and Rs. 41,000, and increased in steps of Rs, 3,000, thus there were a

total of ten income intervals to choose from. There were a total of 100 responders

randomly chosen from each district18.

        There are three main observations. First, majority of the responders from Kolkata

and Howrah choose the interval (Rs. 6,000 – Rs. 9,000) when asked to choose an interval

for a low-income level for a potential groom. Most of the responders from Birbhum

choose the interval (Rs. 2,000 – 5,000) when the same question was asked. Second, for


18
  There were equal numbers of randomly chosen male and female responders. The survey had a total of 22
questions and the main purpose of the survey was to form a rough idea how residents of the state perceive
various attributes that are relevant for an arranged marriage market. We do not report all the results from
the survey here.


                                                    13
high-income level, most choices typically concentrate on the following three income

intervals: (Rs. 22,000 – Rs. 25,000), (Rs. 26,000 – Rs. 29,000), and (Rs. 30,000 – Rs.

33,000), respectively for Birbhum, Howrah, and Kolkata. Third, for medium-income

level, choices mostly concentrate on the following two income intervals: (Rs. 10,000 –

Rs. 13,000) and (Rs. 14,000 – Rs. 17,000), most of the responders from Birbhum chose

the first interval while most of the responders from the other two districts chose the last

interval. In a nutshell, the survey results correspond closely with the experimental income

figures and thus provide much required confidence in our chosen income parameters.

         In the later stage of the experimental design, we assign the following

characteristics to each of the nine potential grooms: age, height, and job. We restrict

ourselves to three different age and height figures (30, 31 and 32 for age & 64, 65, and 66

inches for height), and randomly assign one of them (for each characteristic) to each of

the nine grooms. In order to prevent any subjective characteristic to directly influence

responses received against our advertisements, we decided not to use any physical

characteristic19. In light of strong preference among the population for a governmental

job, we further restrict ourselves to only one occupational category, that is, a government

job, and assign this job characteristic to each of the nine grooms. Since there exists a

positive correlation between educational achievement and earnings of potential grooms in

our collected data, we assign a Masters degree to the medium and high-income grooms,

and a Bachelors degree to a low-income groom (without indicating the filed of study).

The newspaper office randomly assigns a PO box number for each posting when the

19
   Fishman et al. (2006) and Hitsch et al. (2006) find strong evidence that physical attractiveness of
individuals play a crucial role in influencing the mate selection process. Since on average 42 percent of the
advertisements that we collected do not mention looks of prospective grooms, therefore we believe that our
advertisements (which also do not mention looks) do not constitute a major departure from a typical ad
found in this market.


                                                    14
advertisements are submitted for publication. It is implied that each groom in our design

represents a Bengali male with the above characteristics.

         2.2 Why West Bengal?

         West Bengal is one of the few states in India that has an impressive socio-political

history. The state boasts of considerable achievements in the spheres of land reform,

education (69.22 percent literacy rate, The Census of India, 2001), and has witnessed

strong social and working class movements with strong anti-caste emphasis. According to

Deshpande (2001), West Bengal is in the middle of the spectrum in terms of absolute

economic deprivation of SCs and Scheduled Tribes (STs); however in terms of inter-caste

economic disparity (SC/ST versus ‘others’), it is one of the states with the least

disparity20. In case of a state with very high inter-caste economic disparity, an income of

Rs.35000 (which represents high income in our design) for a low-caste groom would be

viewed as an outlier or unrealistic, which is not the case in West Bengal. Thus the low

inter-caste economic inequality adds an important touch of realism to our high-income,

low-caste advertisements and at the same time makes the tradeoff technically more

feasible.

         One might argue that given this substantial socio-economic profiles and political

history, West Bengal appears to fulfill several of the conditions that would be needed to

support our income-caste tradeoff hypothesis and thus may bias our results, which we

seek to contest. The predominant perception in the related literature is that the caste

hierarchy is deeply entrenched in Indian society, i.e., there is virtually no substitutability

between caste status and any other matrimonial attributes. If this reflects a true picture of


20
   The available data divide the population into SCs, STs, and ‘Others’. The latter (everyone else) is a very
large and heterogeneous category.


                                                    15
reality, then there is little hope to obtain any support for our research hypothesis. The

objective of this study is to test if caste-based discrimination can at all be weakened by

economic incentives in the most favorable set up. Failure to find evidence in support of

our research hypothesis in such a favorable state would only imply that there remains

little or no hope about the ability of economic progress to overcome the caste

considerations, at least, in Indian marriage markets.

       2.3   Responses to Advertisements

       We measure whether a given advertisement elicits a response from an interested

bride’s family. Families send their responses, mostly in form of detailed letters, to a

unique PO box number that was assigned to each advertisement by the newspaper at the

time of submission. These PO box numbers help the newspaper identify the responses for

each posting. After two weeks from the date of publication of each of the two batches of

advertisements, the newspaper delivered the packets of responses to our physical address

on a regular basis until the flow of responses finally tapered off; a label on each packet

clearly indicated the advertisement for which those many responses were received. Thus

there remained no scope for responders to contact us directly, and this delivery method

also kept our identity perfectly confidential.

       Most of the responses were in the form of long letters, mainly from the guardians

of the potential brides. Others were written on postcards and inland letters, available from

a typical Indian post office in this part of the country. The average cost of sending a

response may range from Rs. 3.00 to Rs. 7.50 (equivalent to $0.07 and $0.19

respectively), calculated from our data. Very few respondents included a resume and a

picture of the potential bride, in addition to the letter. A typical response includes the




                                             16
following pieces of information: caste, age, height, number of sisters/ brothers, family

size, occupations of parents (government employees, businessman, etc.), if any of the

parents is not alive, potential bride’s education level, occupation, skin complexion, looks,

and a short of description of family wealth (whether the family owns a house, a plot of

land, an apartment etc.). Some responses also mentioned some other features such as

whether any member of the family resides abroad, siblings’ occupations, and occupations

of brother-in-laws and sister-in-laws.

       One may suspect that description of characteristics that advertisers claim to

possess may suffer from widespread misreporting behavior, and as a result one would

have little faith in our interpretation of this data. However the manner in which this

particular market functions may discard such doubts. After the first round of contact, if

both parties (i.e., families) still remain interested in each other then they generally agree

to meet at one’s house to further discuss other details, and introduce a potential bride to a

potential groom (Reddy, 1978). These further meetings add a certain strategic element to

this arranged marriage ‘game’, which is important for our purpose. Specifically, any false

reporting regarding agents’ characteristics can easily be verified during these later

meetings, and thus any misreporting should not be part of a potential match. Also

prospective responders to our advertisements were not aware that they are a part of an

experiment, so we do not have strong reasons to expect considerable incidence of over or

under reporting of true characteristics that may render our data useless.

       We now discuss the potential weaknesses of our experiment. Akin to Fishman et

al. (2006, 2008), Hitsch et al. (2006), we do not have data on final matches, instead we

simply collect responses from brides’ families that only express their willingness to




                                             17
initiate a negotiation process, which may or may not result in a final match. In contrast,

what one may really care for is a final match. Despite this particular limitation of our

study, one would normally expect to have a positive association between initial responses

and final matches, after allowing moderate level of frictions in the mate selection process.

In that sense our parameter for capturing the extent of inter-caste marriages in this

context may be a crude one, but still a useful apparatus.

       Another potential weakness is that newspaper ads are only one of the many

potential channels via which marriage alliances are sought. Social networks, on-line

dating websites are other established examples of matrimonial markets through which

individuals search for potential mates, the ones that are not studied here. We do not

possess any data on the proportion of total marriages in India that are arranged via each

of these channels, however, as indicated earlier newspapers ads have been playing a

critical role in bringing together both sides of the market for a long time in India, and we

simply rely on that trusted channel for executing our experiment.

3      Results

       The nine advertisements, published in two different editions of the same

newspaper, received a total of 1123 unique responses. The responses were received from

various parts of West Bengal and from other states as well that include rural, semi-urban

and urban areas. The analysis presented below pools the responses received against each

of the two batches of advertisements. As mentioned earlier, apart from the responder

caste each response lists several attributes of a prospective bride and her family. While

some of these attributes (e.g., age, height, number of siblings etc.) are objective in nature

and therefore easy to condense into a single statistic, others (looks, skin complexion,




                                             18
occupations etc.) are either too subjective to evaluate on a cardinal scale or vary so much

that it is hard to capture them in a single dimension. To deal with the subjectivity of some

of the reported characteristics, we define (being informed by the data) various categories

for each of them and assign each response to one of these categories.

       Since it is difficult to rank and report numerous reported occupations of parents of

potential brides, we broadly classify them as ‘Government job’, ‘Private job’, ‘Business’,

‘Retired’, and ‘Housewife’, and allocate each response to one of these categories. We

create a binary variable of the form ‘employed’ and ‘not employed’ to capture a potential

bride’s employment status and assign each response to either of the two. We define three

(ordinal) categories of ‘looks’ - ‘very good looks’, ‘good looks’, and ‘average looks’, and

assign each response to one of these categories, based on the self-reported description of

looks of girls. Similarly, we create three distinct categories to capture various skin

complexion types - ‘very fair’, ‘medium fair’ and ‘fair’, and assign each reply to one of

these. We categorize the educational qualification of a girl into ‘below Bachelors’,

‘Bachelors or equivalent’, ‘Masters or equivalent’ and ‘Ph.D.’. Family wealth situation is

often reflected in the data by ownership of a house, an apartment, or in some cases a

piece of land. We create a binary variable, ‘own a house or an apartment’ and ‘do not

own a house or an apartment’ to reflect a family’s financial health, and assign each

response to either of the two categories. Tables 4 – 8 report the incidence of each of

these characteristics in the aggregate data, and in each responder caste group.

       3.1     The Aggregate Response

       Table 2 presents the total number of responses received by each of the nine

grooms, classified by their distinctive caste and income features. The last row indicates




                                            19
that the total number of responses (aggregated over the caste groups) rises with increase

in groom monthly income. The LI, MI, and HI grooms receive approximately 27, 30, and

43 percents of total responses respectively21. The number of responses received by LC

grooms increases monotonically in monthly income; while the same monotonicity holds

true for MC grooms, it does not appear to be the same case for HC grooms. Overall there

appears to be a strict preference for higher income grooms among responders.

        The last column in the table indicates that HC grooms receive the highest number

of responses (37 percent), whereas MC and LC grooms equally share the rest of the total

responses (approximately 31.5 percent each). This may be suggestive of the fact that HC

grooms are the most preferred while the other two types are equally preferred. Holding

the monthly income level of grooms fixed at LI, we find that higher the caste of a groom,

the larger is the number of responses received by that groom. Grooms under MI follow

the same pattern, however this trend is completely reversed in case of grooms that belong

to HI level. We conducted similar analyses separately for each batch of responses, and

found the above trends to be present in each data set. The dynamics that (plausibly) give

rise to these trends in the aggregate data can be uncovered by analyzing the responses

coming from responders belonging to different caste groups.

        There could be a potential concern that these response patterns are driven by pure

supply side effects, and thus may misrepresent true preferences (for various groom types)

of responders. That is, the distribution of three caste groups in the total state population

or the income distribution within a specific caste may have shaped these response

patterns rather than the true preferences of responders. For example, the last column in

21
  We will use HI, MI, and LI for high, medium, and low monthly income level respectively, and HC, MC,
and LC to indicate high, medium, and low caste respectively throughout this section.




                                                 20
Table 2 may not necessarily imply an underlying preference for higher caste grooms. If

these three caste groups are present in the state population in that specific order (in terms

of their respective shares), then the last column may simply reflect respective share of

each group on the demand side of the market and not a preference for the castes of the

potential grooms22. In general, in any matching markets determining preferences for mate

selection from observed outcomes is always difficult because a given outcome is often

consistent with a particular preference structure or a supply side account. However, our

analyses in the following subsections contradict such effects. Thus we believe that the

assumption of no supply side effect and the consequent no strategic behavior is justified,

although, some element of such behavior may be present in the data.

        3.2      Responses Classified by The Responder Caste

        Tables 2A, 2B, and 2C present the distribution of responses by responder caste

type. The number in each cell represents the percentage of ith caste responses that were

sent for the jth groom type. We divide the total responses into two categories, intra-caste

and inter-caste responses. While the analysis of intra-caste responses sheds light on the

strength of own-caste preference in the context of this market, the scrutiny of inter-caste

responses focuses on the discriminatory preference- income trade off hypothesis.

        3.2.1    The Intra-Caste Responses

        The last column of each table reveals that each responder caste group sends the

largest proportion of their total responses to the grooms who belong to their own caste.

For instance, the three HC grooms receive approximately 59 percent of all HC responses,

22
   The Census of India (2001) provides population data at the state level only for the following three
groups: SCc, STs, and Other Backward Classes (OBCs). All the other castes are clubbed under the general
category. The HC and MC groups included in our study belong to the general category. Therefore we do
not have data about the shares of the these two caste groups in the state population, although we have the
corresponding data for the LC group.


                                                   21
and the corresponding figures for the MC and LC grooms are approximately 42 and 59

percents respectively. This is a clear indication of a strong own-caste preference among

the responders and is consistent with the dominant view in the literature pertaining to the

Indian marriage system. The sheer magnitudes of these percentages also suggest that HC

and LC responders may have stronger own-caste preference than that of MC responders.

In other words, MC responders exhibit relatively higher propensity to respond to grooms

of other castes in our data, which may be attributed to the relative position of this caste

group in the caste hierarchy, as they can respond in both upward and downward

directions unlike responders from the other two caste groups.

       The analysis also reveals that the HI groom in each caste group receives the

highest number of responses that are from their own caste. Moreover there exists a

positive relation between the number of own-caste responses and monthly income of a

groom in that caste group. For example, the HC groom with HI receives 23 percent of all

HC responses. The corresponding figures for {MC, HI} and {LC, HI} groom types are

approximately 22 and 25 percents respectively. These findings accord well with an

important observation made in Anderson (2003) that brides’ families are expected to be

especially sensitive to earnings of own-caste grooms. Since an own-caste alliance does

not imply any gain or loss of caste status for females, income becomes one of the primary

determinants of mate selection. To sum up, the analysis of intra-caste responses indicates

that each responder caste group prefers own-caste grooms to grooms from the other

castes, and among those the groom with the highest income seems to be the most

preferred.




                                            22
         The argument that potential supply side effects may cause above response

patterns is plainly refuted by our data. To see this consider the following: in West Bengal

LC (in our design) constitutes a relatively small proportion of the total population (only 4

percent of the state population are Namasudras as per The Census of India, 2001). This

means most of their marriage prospects are in the upper caste groups. If the assumed

supply side effect shaped the responses of LC responders, then they are expected to

respond relatively more frequently to MC and HC grooms than to grooms who belong to

their own caste, simply in order to increase the likelihood of finding a potential groom.

Since in the data LC responders send majority (59 percent) of their total responses to

own-caste grooms, this clearly refutes the supply side account. The same line of

reasoning applies to responders from other castes as the case may be.

         One may also argue that a strategic consideration may explain why responders of

a given caste group show an increasing preference for higher income grooms who belong

to their own caste. The alleged effect may operate in the following manner. Since in a

country like India the high-income population constitutes a small proportion of the total

population, and then assuming that the low-income population constitutes a large

proportion of the total population of each caste group in West Bengal, a strategic

behavior would imply that the largest share of intra-caste responses should go to the LI

grooms23. This response behavior would presumably enhance the probability of finding a


23
  Even though we assume that low-income population constitutes a large fraction of the total population of
each caste group in West Bengal, in light of the scantly available data it does not appear to lie far from the
reality. According to the UNDP Human Development Report, 2007-08, India’s Gini index was 36.8 in
2004-05; the richest 20 percent population account for 43 percent of the national income and the poorest 20
percent receive only 8 percent of the national income. This skewed distribution indicates that 80 percent of
the country’s population share only 57 percent of the country’s income, which suggests that a small
proportion of the population belong to the high income group. Since income data by caste groups are not
available, we refer to these national income figures, which can provide a rough picture of the overall
income distribution prevailing in the country.


                                                     23
match for a responder. However the trend in the data contradicts this strategic response.

In contrast we observe that the HI groom in each caste group receives the highest number

of responses from their own caste. Thus supply side arguments cannot explain the intra-

caste response patterns found in the data.

       3.3     The Inter-Caste Responses

       In order to shed light on the main hypothesis of this study, we focus on the inter-

caste responses. We distinguish between two possible types of inter-caste responses: one

in which a higher-caste responder replies to a potential lower-caste groom, and the other

in which a lower-caste responder replies to a potential higher-caste groom.           The

distinction is important as incentives differ in each direction. Recall that a lower-caste

female would experience a gain in caste status by marrying a higher-caste male, while a

higher-caste female would experience a loss in caste status by marrying a lower-caste

male. Thus an asymmetric incentive structure prevails for different caste groups so far

inter-caste mobility is concerned.

       While there exists a universal consensus regarding strict own-caste preference in

Indian marriage markets (Anderson, 2003), our data is largely at variance with this

observation. Despite the evidence in favor of strong own-caste preference, we find that a

significant proportion of responders (approximately 41, 58, and 41 percents of HC, MC

and LC responders respectively) reply to grooms outside their own caste. We first

concentrate on the responses that are sent from the upper strata of the caste hierarchy.

Approximately 24 percent of all HC responses go to MC grooms, and 17 percent to LC

grooms; thus HC responders on average display greater willingness to marry a MC

groom than marrying a LC groom. Given the status of each caste in the caste hierarchy,




                                             24
this is quite intuitive. Furthermore responses from HC group diminish steadily as the

income of a lower-caste groom decreases (see 2nd & 3rd rows of Table 2A). MC

responders in contrast send 31 percent of their total responses to LC grooms. Responses

from MC group also gradually decrease as the income of a LC groom goes down (see 3rd

row of Table 2B). While theoretically there remains no reason for HC and MC

responders to reply to lower-caste advertisements, we find that responders of these caste

groups are actually willing to select a mate from lower-caste groups, moreover higher the

income of a lower-caste groom higher the number of responses from higher-caste

responders. In sum, these observations might indicate that higher-caste responders are

willing to trade off their caste status for higher incomes of potential grooms, i.e., they are

ready to accept a loss in the caste status by expressing their willingness to marry a lower-

caste groom with considerably higher than average income.

       Could supply side effects explain these response patterns in the data? One

potential argument could be the following. Assume that the respective shares of HC and

MC groups in the state population are higher than that of LC group, and therefore

responses from these groups merely reflect their large presence in the market and do not

necessarily mirror their preference for potential lower caste grooms with higher incomes,

as we argue. Granted this, why these responders respond in a fashion that reveals their

greater sensitivity to higher incomes of such grooms? One may still make a case that

since higher income is known to positively correlate with liberal attitudes, then having

realized this higher-caste responders apply in greater numbers to potential lower-caste

grooms with higher income, simply to increase their likelihood of acceptance. However if

this were true then in principle that should also affect the response behavior of lower-




                                             25
caste responders when they reply to potential higher-caste grooms. A close inspection of

1st row of Table 2B and 1st & 2nd rows of Table 2C reveal that lower-caste responses

actually decrease as income of a potential higher-caste groom rises; hence a

contradiction. Thus, we conclude that higher-caste responses mostly reflect preference for

potential lower-caste grooms with higher earnings.

       Shifting focus to the inter-caste responses from lower-caste groups, we find that

approximately 27 percent of all MC responses and only 11 percent of all LC responses go

to HC grooms, whereas 30 percent of all LC responses are directed towards MC grooms.

Thus LC responders on average display greater willingness to marry a MC groom than

marrying a HC groom. Again, this may be a sheer reflection of the caste hierarchy.

Furthermore there exists an inverse relationship between the number of lower-caste

responses and the income of a higher-caste groom (see 1st row of Table 2B and 1st & 2nd

rows of Table 2C). Thus lower-caste responders also respond to the income incentives

provided by potential higher-caste grooms, but unlike their higher-caste counterparts. In

sum, these findings might that indicate that lower-caste responders are prepared to

tradeoff their preference for higher incomes of potential grooms (evident from the intra-

caste responses) for a gain in the caste status by expressing their willingness to marry a

higher-caste groom with lower income. Thus, inter-caste responses show evidence of

willingness to trade off caste status with groom income that exists on both sides of the

market.

       3.4     Estimates of Caste-Income Trade offs

       Having discovered remarkable evidence of trade-offs between caste and income

attributes in our data, we answer a question that is natural to ask at this point, i.e., how




                                            26
much additional income does a potential lower-caste groom need to earn in order to

compensate a higher-caste female for her loss of caste status, given that a higher-caste

female is willing to marry down the line of caste? This question can also be re-phrased in

the following manner appropriate in our context. How much additional income a groom

of caste i and income j must earn in order to receive that many responses from responder

caste group k as received by a groom of caste k and income j from the responder group k,

where k denotes a higher caste than i, fixing the other characteristics of these two grooms

which is true in our design?

       We estimate these additional income figures for each of the three possible {k, i}

pairs in our design based on the observed average income sensitivity of caste k responder

group, where the average income sensitivity for a group is defined as the change in the

number of responses from caste k responders as the income of a potential groom from

caste i varies from LI to HI. In other words, how many additional responses on average a

LC groom receives from HC responders as that groom’s income increases from Rs.7000

to Rs.35000 in our design. The sensitivity figures for HC responders with respect to

potential MC and LC grooms are 1.61 and 1.64 respectively, while the same for MC

responders is 1.11 with respect to potential LC grooms. How to read such a figure? For

example, for every Rs. 1000 increase in income of a LC groom expects to receive 1.64

additional responses from HC responders. Somewhat unintuitively, on average a MC

responder increases responses by a smaller number than a HC responder to every Rs.

1000 increase in income of a LC groom, while one would expect the opposite.

       Table 3 presents the income estimates for the three possible pairs. Based on these

trade-off estimates several important observations can be made. First, these estimates in




                                            27
general indicate prevalence of strong own-caste preference and enormous economic

incentives are needed to overcome this preference. For example, a LC groom with LI

needs an approximate additional income of Rs.49,300 in order to receive the same

number of responses from HC responders as received by a HC groom from HC

responders with the same income feature (see Panel A). Note that this additional income

requirement is more than seven times than LI. Second, an element by element

comparison of income figures between Panels A and B suggest that LC grooms require

larger increments in income than those of MC grooms to compensate a HC responder for

her potential loss of caste status. This result may be attributed to the fact that in the social

hierarchy LC is ranked lower than MC, which in turn implies that the loss in social status

of a HC female for marrying a LC groom is larger than the loss associated with marrying

a MC groom. Hence, LC grooms need to compensate more than MC grooms. Following a

similar argument, one can understand why LC grooms need to compensate a MC

responder less than they need to compensate a HC responder (compare figures in Panels

A and C). Third, the compensation amount provided by a potential lower-caste groom to

a HC responder gradually falls as the monthly income of such a groom rises. However

the trend is completely reversed in case of LC grooms when they compensate MC

responders. We do not have a well-grounded explanation for the latter effect.

       To sum up, these estimates indicate that economic incentives (in terms of

increased income) offered by potential lower-caste grooms have to be substantial in order

to overcome the strong own-caste preference in Indian marriage markets, and larger the

social gap (determined by the caste hierarchy) between the two caste groups the larger is

the amount of income required by lower-caste males to compensate for the loss of caste




                                              28
status of higher-caste females for making the latter group willing to consider the former

group as potential grooms.

        Another trade-off arises when lower-caste responders reply to higher-caste

grooms. A similar question about the trade-off is: what is the magnitude of potential

groom income that a lower-caste responder is willing to forgo by not marrying an own-

caste groom, and instead expressing willingness to marry a higher-caste groom with

lower income? In order answer this we would need to observe a counterfactual. What is

the highest plausible groom income that would cause a lower-caste responder with given

characteristics to respond to own-caste grooms? If one knows this and also observes a

lower-caste responder with similar characteristics actually responding to a higher-caste

groom with certain income level, then one could estimate the magnitude of income

forgone by a lower-caste responder. However our design cannot afford such data, and

therefore we cannot answer the question raised above.

        3.5    Other Matrimonial Characteristics

       Apart from caste, each response supplies information about several other

characteristics of a girl and her family. This additional information will enable us to

understand better why some of the higher-caste responders are willing to step down the

line of caste and why some of the lower-caste responders are eager to move up the caste

ladder. Tables 4-8 present the distribution of some selected attributes. Parts A to C of

each table present the distributions by three responder caste groups.

       The data on characteristics that are viewed as advantageous for a potential bride

from the standpoint of a marriage market (like employment status, education level, very

fair complexion, and very good looks) reveal interesting patterns. The last column of each




                                            29
of the Tables 4, 5, 6, and 7, reveal that higher the groom caste, the higher is the share of

responses with the respective attribute. Similarly, we observe that higher the groom

income, the higher the share of responses that possess these attributes (see the last row of

each of the Tables 4, 5, 6, and 7). Home or apartment ownership, an indicator of family

wealth, also depicts similar trends (see Table 8). Thus the aggregate data on these

characteristics suggest that grooms with higher caste and higher income receive proposals

from responders with superior bridal and familial attributes. While this trend is

interesting in itself, disaggregating the aggregate data by responder caste for each

characteristic can unearth whether these patterns hold true for each responder caste

group.

           The disaggregated data reveal that the share of HC responses, possessing each of

the above desirable characteristics, decreases with declining caste status (see the last

column of each of the Tables 4A, 5A, 6A, 7A, and 8A). Holding constant groom income,

the same response pattern is observed (see the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th columns of each of the

Tables 4A, 5A, 6A, 7A, and 8A)24. Additionally share of HC responses, with these

positive attributes, goes up with the rise in groom monthly income (see the last row of

each of the Tables 4A, 5A, 6A, 7A, and 8A), and again, this trend holds while groom

caste is held constant (see the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th rows of each of the Tables 4A, 5A, 6A, 7A,

and 8A). What do these patterns imply? This broadly means that on average HC

responders who possess these superior bridal and familial attributes respond in lower

proportion to lower-caste and lower-income grooms.

           How do MC responders fare compared to their HC counterparts? We find that the

share of MC responses, with each of these positive attributes, is higher when they apply
24
     With a minor exception of ‘Very Good Looks’.


                                                    30
for HC grooms than when they apply for own-caste grooms. Strikingly, the share of MC

responses is lower when they apply for LC grooms than when they apply for own-caste

grooms (see the last column and the last row of each of the Tables 4B, 5B, 6B, 7B, and

8B)25. This implies that on average MC responders who possess these superior

matrimonial attributes respond in higher proportion to HC and HI grooms and vice-versa.

        Compared to HC and MC responders, LC responders exhibit a different pattern.

LC responders with these attributes send the largest proportion of their responses to their

own-caste grooms and the second largest of the responses go to MC grooms26.

Furthermore, own-caste LC responses rise with the rise in groom income (see the second-

last row of each of the Tables 4C, 5C, 6C, 7C, and 8C). These regularities in the data

imply that LC responders with these qualities perhaps prefer own-caste grooms with

higher income, and distribute the responses accordingly.

        From these trends we can infer that higher-caste responders with positive

attributes are less willing to marry a lower-caste or a lower-income male. But they are

ready to marry down the caste line only for lower-caste grooms with higher income.

While MC responders with these attributes are more willing to marry HC grooms, LC

responders with positive attributes, on the other hand, are less willing to marry a higher-

caste male. Hence the data suggest that there exists a constellation of factors such as caste

status, groom income, and marital characteristics of brides that may have given rise to

observed patterns.

4       Conclusion



25
  With the exception of the attribute ‘Employed Bride’.
26
   The only exception is ‘Master’s Degree’ for which they send the largest proportion of responses to MC
grooms.


                                                   31
       This study serves an important purpose in understanding the interactive relation

between discriminatory preference underlying the search for a potential mate and

economic incentives. Compared to the prior literature that uncovers a set of determinants

of inter-group preferences in marriage markets, our study advances this understanding by

exploring the impact of an enormously essential determinant of mate selection (i.e.,

income) on such preferences.

       To investigate this question, we conduct a field experiment in a reputable

matrimonial market in India. Existing marriages in India are claimed to exhibit a strong

sorting along the caste line where caste of an individual is a proxy for statistical

discrimination and a parameter of social status. We choose three distinct caste groups and

three notably different monthly income figures, and construct advertisements for nine

distinct grooms who differ either in monthly earnings (within a caste group) or in caste

status (across a caste group), while controlling other characteristics. We post these

advertisements in two different editions of a Bengali language newspaper with sufficient

time gap; measure responses from prospective brides’ families for each groom type, and

thus cast light on the research hypothesis.

        There are two major findings. First, each caste group in our study exhibits a

strong preference for in-caste grooms and thereby discriminates against grooms from the

other two castes, despite the fact that both groom types possess the exactly same set of

attributes. Second, economic incentives in terms of higher incomes of lower-caste

grooms have the potential to bend the biased preferences of upper caste females.

       How do the existing theories of inter-group marriages account for these results?

We discuss a prominent and the most well known theory in sociology - social exchange




                                              32
theory (Merton, 1940). Specifically, we discuss the relevance of this model with a focus

on the inter-caste marriage response data that our experiment yields.

       The social exchange theory postulates that an individual in a marriage market is

represented by a set of characteristics (height, gender, caste, income, age, job, and so on).

These characteristics determine the value of an individual in a marriage market, and also

the social cost of marrying an individual with such characteristics. Coupled with this, if

one assumes that there is a cost (benefit) for higher-caste (lower-caste) females for

marrying someone from lower-caste (higher-caste), then the predictions of this model

succinctly capture key elements of inter-caste response data.

        For example, since Brahmins are at the top of the caste hierarchy, inter-caste

marriage will always come at a social cost to a female from this caste. According to the

social exchange theory, in equilibrium a Brahmin female must be compensated for her

loss of caste status by intermarrying with a lower-caste male who either has higher than

average earnings or possesses superior other matrimonial attributes. Similarly, a

Namasudra (placed at the bottom of the caste hierarchy) female who gains caste status by

intermarrying with a higher-caste male must possess either superior attributes or forego

some income, by plausibly not marrying a higher income own-caste groom, in order to

compensate that higher-caste male. Thus, this theory predicts a trade between various

characteristics and caste status.

       We do not have data on final matches to directly test these predictions. However,

the inter-caste response data from our experiment may indirectly shed some light. The

data indicate that responses from higher-caste females increase monotonically with the

monthly income figures of lower-caste grooms. This might imply that higher-caste




                                             33
responders are attempting to compensate themselves by applying for lower-caste grooms

with higher income for their potential loss of caste status. This supports the prediction of

the social exchange theory. However, the data does not provide support for the prediction

that a lower-caste female who gains caste status by intermarrying with a higher-caste

male possesses either superior attributes or foregoes some income.

       Our study documents that the tools of field experiment can be effectively used to

gain important insights into the mate selection behavior. With the help of this

methodological tool, we are able to convincingly document that same caste marriages in

India are the result of preferences, and both sides of the market share this preference.

More interestingly, income of a potential groom can play a significant role in dominating

biased preferences. However income is just one of the many vital determinants of mate

selection, and this study takes a small but crucial step towards understanding the impact

of only one such determinant on inter-group intimacy. One could potentially think of

imitating the approach taken by this study to identify impacts of a host of similar

important determinants.




                                            34
                                          References

       Ahuvia, Aaron C., & Adelman, Mara B. (1992) Formal Intermediaries in the
Marriage Market: A typology and Review, Journal of Marriage and the Family, 54, 2,
pp. 452-463.

      Akerlof, George (1976) The Economics of Caste and the Rat Race and Other
Woeful Tales, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 4, pp. 599-617.

      Anderson, Siwan (2003) Why Dowry Payments Declined with Modernization in
Europe but Are Rising in India, Journal of Political Economy, 111, 2, pp. 269-310.

       Austrom, D. & Hanel, K. (1983) Looking for Companionship in the Classified
Section, Unpublished manuscript, York University.

       Avasthi, Abha (1979) Hindu Marriage in Continuity and Change, Lucknow Pub.,
House, Lucknow, India.

     Bandyopadhyay, Sekhar (1997) Caste, Protest and Identity in Colonial India: The
Namasudras of Bengal, 1872-1947, Taylor & Francis, Inc.

      Becker, Gary S. (1957) The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago,
Chicago.

      Becker, Gary S. (1973) A Theory of Marriage: Part I, Journal of Political
Economy, 81, 4, pp. 813-846.

      Becker, Gary S. (1974) A Theory of Marriage: Part II, Journal of Political
Economy, 82, 2, Part 2: marriage, Family Human Capital, and Fertility., pp. S11-S26.

       Bertrand, Marianne & Mullainathan, Sendhil (2004) Are Emily and Greg More
Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on labor Market
Discrimination, American Economic Review, 94, 4, pp. 991-1013.

       Bisin, Alberto, Topa, Giorgio & Verdier, Thierry (2004) Religious Intermarriage
and Socialization in the United States, Journal of Political Economy, 112, 3, pp. 615-664.

       Blau, P.M. (1964) Exchange and Power in Social Life, John Wiley & Sons Inc.

      Brown, Colin & Gay, Pat (1985) Racial Discrimination 17 Years After the Act,
London: Policy Studies Institute.

      Buss, David M. (1989) Toward an Evolutionary Psychology of Human Mating
Behavioral and Brian Sciences, XII, pp. 39-49.




                                           35
       Buss, David M. & Schmitt, David P. (1993) Sexual Strategies Theory: An
Evolutionary Perspective of Human Mating, Psychological Review, C, pp. 204-232.

         Buss, D. (2003) The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating. Basic
Books.

      Choo, E. & Siow, A. (2006) Who Marries Whom and Why, Journal of Political
Economy, 114, 1, pp.175-201.

        Corwin, Lauren A.(1977) Caste Class and the Love marriage: Social Change in
India, Journal of marriage and the Family, 39, 4, pp. 823-831.

       Deolalikar, Anil B. & Rao, Vijayendra (1998) The Demand for Dowries and
Bride Characteristics in Marriage: Empirical Estimates for Rural South Central India, In
Gender, Population and Development, edited by Krishna R. Maithreyi, Ratna M.
Sudershan, and Abusaleh Shariff, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

       Deshpande, Ashwini (2001) Caste at Birth? Redefining Disparity in India, Review
of Development Economics, 5, 1, pp. 130-144.

       Deshpande, Ashwini (2000) Does Caste Still Define Disparity? A look at
Inequality in Kerala, India, The American Economic Review, 90, 2, pp. 322-325

        Driver, Edwin D. (1984) Social Class and Marital Homogamy in Urban South
India, Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 15, pp. 195-210.

       Dumont, L. (1980) Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and its Implications,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

       Fishman, Raymond, Iyengar, Sheena S., Kamenica, Emir & Simonson, Itamar
(2008) Racial Preference in Dating, Review of Economic Studies, 75, pp. 117–132.

      Fishman, Raymond, Iyengar, Sheena S, Kamenica, Emir & Simonson, Itamar
(2006) Gender Differences in Mate Selection: Evidence from a Speed Dating
Experiment, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 673-697.

      Frank, Sue A. & Lewis, Gregory B. (2004) Government Employees, The
American Review of Public Administration, 34, 1, pp. 36-51.

        Fryer Jr., Ronald G. (2007) Guess Who’s Been Coming to Dinner? Trends in
Interracial Marriage over the 20th Century, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 2, pp.
71-90.

       Gangopadhyay, Bela (1964) Marriage Regulations Among Certain Castes of
Bengal, Deccan College Dissertation Series, 25, Poona, India.




                                          36
       Gist, Noel P. (1953-54) Mate Selection and Mass Communication in India The
Public Opinion Quarterly, 17, 4, pp. 481-495.

      Harlan, Lindsey & Courtright, Paul B. (1995) From the Margins of Hindu
Marriage, Oxford University Press.

      Hitsch, Gunter J., Hortacsu, Ali & Ariely, Dan (2006) What Makes You Click? –
Mate Preferences and Matching Outcomes in Online Dating, MIT Sloan Working Paper
4603-06.

       Jowell, Roger & Prescott-Clark, Patricia (1970) Racial Discrimination and White
Collar Workers in Britain, Race, 11, 4, pp. 397-417.

       Kannan, C.T. (1963) Intercaste and Inter-community Marriages in India, Allied
Publishers Private Limited.

       Kalmijn, M. (1993) Trends in Black/White Intermarriage, Social Forces, 72, 1,
pp. 119-146.

      Kingsley, Davis (1941) Intermarriage          in   Caste   Societies,   American
Anthropologist, New Series, 43, 3, pp. 376-395.

       Kurzban, R. & Weeden, J. (2005) Hurry Date: Mate Preferences in Action,
Evolution and Human Behavior, 26, pp. 227-244.

      Landis, Judson T. (1949) Marriages of Mixed and Non-mixed Religious Faith,
American Sociological Review, 14, pp. 401-407.

        Levin, Shana, Taylor, Pamela L. & Caudle, Elena (2007) Interethnic and
interracial dating in college: A longitudinal study, Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 24, 3, pp. 323-341.

      Lynn, Michael & Bolig, Rosemary (1985) Personal Advertisements: Sources of
Data About Relationships, Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 2, pp. 377-383.

      Merton, Robert K. (1941) Intermarriage and the Social Structure: Fact and
Theory, Psychiatry, 4, pp. 361-74.

      Mills, J.K., Daly, J., Longmore, A., & Kilbridge, G. (1995) A Note on Family
Acceptance Involving Interracial Friendships and Romantic Relationships, Journal of
Psychology, 129, pp. 349-351

       Mok, T. A. (1999) Asian American Dating: Important Factors in Partner Choice,
Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 5, pp. 103-117.




                                          37
       Ramu. G.N. (1977) Family and Caste in Urban India: A Case Study. Vikas
Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.

      Rao, Vijayendra (1993) The Rising Price of Husbands: A Hedonic Analysis of
Dowry Increases in Rural India, Journal of Political Economy, 101, 4, pp. 666-677.

        Rao, V. V. P. & Rao, V. N. (1980) The Dowry System in Indian Marriages:
Attitudes, Expectations and Practices, International Journal of Sociology of the Family,
10, pp. 99-113.

       Reddy, G. Sreenivas & Rajanna, C. (1984) Intercaste Marriage: A Study, Social
Welfare, 31, pp. 10-12.

       Reddy, N. K. (1978) Marriages in India, The Academic Press.

       Regan, P. C., Levin, L., Sprecher, S., Christopher, S. F., & Rodney, C. (2000)
Partner preferences: What Characteristics Do Men and Women Desire in Their Short-
Term Sexual and Long-Term Romantic Partners? Journal of Psychology and Human
Sexuaity, XII, pp.1-21

      Riach, Peter A. & Rich, Judity. (1991) Testing for Racial Discrimination in the
Labor Market, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 15, 3, pp.239-256.

        Scoville, J. (1991) Towards a Formal Model of a Caste Economy, In J.Scovile
(ed.) Status Influences in Third World Labor Markets: Caste, Gender and Custom,
Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 49-59

       Stewart, S., Stinnett, H., & Lawrence, B. (2000) Sex Differences in Desired
Characteristics of Short-Term and Long-Term Relationship Partners, Journal of Social
and Personal Relationships, XVII, pp.843-853.

       Thomas, John L. (1951) The Factor of Religion in the Selection of Marriage
Mates, American Sociological Review, 16, pp. 487-491.

       Wang, Hongyu & Kao, Grace (2007) Does Higher Socioeconomic Status Increase
Contact Between Minorities and Whites? An Examination of Interracial Romantic
Relationships Among Adolescents, Social Science Quarterly, 88, 1, pp. 146-164.

      Wong, L.Y. (2003) Structural Estimation of Marriage Models, Journal of Labor
Economics, 21, 3, pp. 699-727.




                                           38
Table 1A Summary Statistics of Selected Variables Based on Collected
Advertisements
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Aggregate         HC                MC                LC
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Income (Rs.)
Obs.                       1261              527               375               359
Mean                       15858.45          17231.5           16714             12949.16
Std. Dev.                  9893.77           8375.99           12316.67          8421.84
Min                        2000              4500              2000              3500
Max                        50000             40000             50000             50000
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Age (Years)
Obs.                       2776              1368              768               640
Mean                       31.75             32.07             31.33             31.56
Std. Dev.                  4.27              4.35              4.38              3.88
Min                        22                22                23                24
Max                        50                46                50                43
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Height (Feet.Inches)
Obs.                       2777              1368              768               768
Mean                       5.47              5.44              5.54              5.35
Std. Dev.                  0.31              0.31              0.32              0.30
Min                        4.1               4.1               4.1               4.1
Max                        6.2               6.1               7.5               6.2
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1B Summary Statistics of Selected Variables Based on Collected
Advertisements
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Aggregate         HC                MC                LC
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Govt. Job                  2220              1100              591               529
                           (79.94)           (80.41)           (76.95)           (82.53)
PO Box                     1529              802               381               346
                           (55.06)           (58.63)           (49.61)           (53.98)
Caste No Bar               104               45                15                44
                           (3.75)            (3.29)            (1.95)            (6.86)
Income Mentioned 1261                        527               375               359
                           (45.41)           (38.52)           (48.83)           (56.01)
Looks Mentioned            1619              779               406               434
                           (58.30)           (56.94)           (52.86)           (67.71)
Education                  571               275               196               100
Not Mentioned              (20.56)           (20.10)           (25.52)           (15.60)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figures in parentheses denote percentage



                                                    39
Table 2 Total Number of Responses Received by Different Groom Types
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      140               126               146               412
                  MC                159               114               82                355
                  LC                178               101               77                356
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             477               341               305               1123
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 2A Distribution of Responses from HC Group (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      23.01             17.78             17.99             58.79
                  MC                13.81             6.07              4.39              24.27
                  LC                10.67             5.23              1.05              16.95
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             47.49             29.08             23.43             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total number of responses from HC = 478

Table 2B Distribution of Responses from MC Group (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      7.22              9.09              10.43             26.74
                  MC                22.19             12.30             7.75              42.25
                  LC                15.51             8.29              7.22              31.02
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             44.92             29.68             25.40             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total number of responses from MC = 374

Table 2C Distribution of Responses from LC Group (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      1.11              2.58              7.75              11.44
                  MC                3.69              14.39             11.81             29.89
                  LC                25.46             16.61             16.61             58.67
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             30.26             33.58             36.16             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total number of responses from LC = 271



                                                    40
Table 3 Caste-Income Trade-off Estimates when Higher-Caste Responders Respond
to Lower-Caste Grooms

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Responder                           Groom             Groom             ΔIncome
Caste                               Caste             Income            (‘000 Rs.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Panel A
HC                                  LC                7000              49.3
HC                                  LC                15000             37.1
HC                                  LC                35000             35.9

Panel B
HC                                  MC                7000              40.4
HC                                  MC                15000             34.8
HC                                  MC                35000             27.4

Panel C
MC                                  LC                7000              1.8
MC                                  LC                15000             13.6
MC                                  LC                35000             22.6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:

i. Each ΔIncome figure denotes the magnitude of additional income that a groom of ith caste and jth income
needs in order to receive as many responses as a groom of the responder’s own caste with jth income
received. For example, the LC groom with Rs.7,000 needs an additional income of Rs. 49,300 to get as
many responses from HC responders as the HC groom with Rs.7000 received from HC responders in our
data.

ii. These estimates are based on average income sensitivity figures.




                                                     41
Table 4 Distribution of Responses with ‘Employed’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      23.44             17.19             13.54             54.17
                  MC                10.42             8.33              3.13              21.88
                  LC                16.67             4.69              2.60              23.96
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             50.52             30.21             19.27             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 172; Percentage of total responses = 17

Table 4A Distribution of HC Responses with ‘Employed’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      39.33             19.10             15.73             74.16
                  MC                8.99              4.49              3.37              16.85
                  LC                6.74              2.25              0.00              8.99
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             55.06             25.84             19.10             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 89; Percentage of HC responses = 19

Table 4B Distribution of MC Responses with ‘Employed’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      17.31             25.00             13.46             55.77
                  MC                17.31             1.92              0.00              19.23
                  LC                17.31             3.85              3.85              25.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             51.92             30.77             17.31             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 52; Percentage of MC responses = 14

Table 4C Distribution of LC Responses with ‘Employed’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      1.96              5.88              9.80              17.65
                  MC                5.88              21.57             5.88              33.33
                  LC                33.33             9.80              5.88              49.02
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             41.18             37.25             21.57             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 51; Percentage of LC responses = 19


                                                    42
Table 5 Distribution of Responses with ‘Master’s Degree’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      20.10             16.79             16.28             53.18
                  MC                14.76             9.92              5.09              29.77
                  LC                10.43             5.34              1.27              17.05
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             45.29             32.06             22.65             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 393; Percentage of total responses = 35

Table 5A Distribution of HC Responses with ‘Master’s Degree’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      36.41             20.65             17.39             74.46
                  MC                11.96             3.26              1.63              16.85
                  LC                7.07              1.63              0.00              8.70
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             55.43             25.54             19.02             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 184; Percentage of HC responses = 39

Table 5B Distribution of MC Responses with ‘Master’s Degree’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      8.40              18.32             16.79             43.51
                  MC                25.19             10.69             3.82              39.69
                  LC                13.74             2.29              0.76              16.79
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             47.33             31.30             21.37             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 131; Percentage of MC responses = 35

Table 5C Distribution of LC Responses with ‘Master’s Degree’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      1.28              5.13              12.82             19.23
                  MC                3.85              24.36             15.38             43.59
                  LC                12.82             19.23             5.13              37.18
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             17.95             48.72             33.33             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 78; Percentage of LC responses = 29


                                                    43
Table 6 Distribution of Responses with ‘Very Fair Complexion’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      18.02             15.32             14.71             48.05
                  MC                13.51             8.71              6.31              28.53
                  LC                14.11             5.41              3.90              23.42
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             45.65             29.43             24.92             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses: 333; Percentage of total responses: 30

Table 6A Distribution of HC Responses with ‘Very Fair Complexion’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      34.96             21.95             14.63             71.54
                  MC                9.76              4.88              4.88              19.51
                  LC                6.50              1.63              0.81              8.94
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             51.22             28.46             20.33             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 123; Percentage of HC responses = 26

Table 6B Distribution of MC Responses with ‘Very Fair Complexion’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      12.50             15.63             15.63             43.75
                  MC                24.22             7.81              0.78              32.81
                  LC                16.41             4.69              2.34              23.44
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             53.13             28.13             18.75             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 128; Percentage of MC responses = 34

Table 6C Distribution of LC Responses with ‘Very Fair Complexion’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      1.22              4.88              13.41             19.51
                  MC                2.44              15.85             17.07             35.37
                  LC                21.95             12.20             10.98             45.12
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             25.61             32.93             41.46             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 82; Percentage of LC responses = 30


                                                    44
Table 7 Distribution of Responses with ‘Very Good Looks’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      19.51             18.29             15.85             53.66
                  MC                9.76              6.10              4.88              20.73
                  LC                15.85             3.66              6.10              25.61
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             45.12             28.05             26.83             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 82; Percentage of total responses = 7

Table 7A Distribution of HC Responses with ‘Very Good Looks’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      38.89             25.00             19.44             83.33
                  MC                5.56              0.00              0.00              5.56
                  LC                11.11             0.00              0.00              11.11
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             55.56             25.00             19.44             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 36; Percentage of HC responses = 8

Table 7B Distribution of MC Responses with ‘Very Good Looks’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      4.55              27.27             9.09              40.91
                  MC                27.27             4.55              0.00              31.82
                  LC                13.64             0.00              13.64             27.27
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             45.45             31.82             22.73             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 22; Percentage of MC responses = 6

Table 7C Distribution of LC Responses with ‘Very Good Looks’ Bride (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      4.17              0.00              16.67             20.83
                  MC                0.00              16.67             16.67             33.33
                  LC                25.00             12.50             8.33              45.83
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             29.17             29.17             41.67             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 24; Percentage of LC responses = 9


                                                    45
 Table 8 Distribution of Responses with ‘Home or Apartment Ownership’ (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      20.97             11.94             15.16             48.06
                  MC                11.94             7.74              5.81              25.48
                  LC                14.19             6.45              5.81              26.45
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             47.10             26.13             26.77             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 310; Percentage of total responses = 28

Table 8A Distribution of HC Responses with ‘Home or Apartment Ownership’ (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      40.68             19.49             15.25             75.42
                  MC                6.78              4.24              2.54              13.56
                  LC                6.78              3.39              0.85              11.02
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             54.24             27.12             18.64             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 118; Percentage of HC responses = 25

Table 8B Distribution of MC Responses with ‘Home or Apartment Ownership’ (%)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      13.39             9.82              16.96             40.18
                  MC                22.32             8.04              5.36              35.71
                  LC                16.96             3.57              3.57              24.11
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             52.68             21.43             25.89             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 112; Percentage of MC responses = 30

Table 8C Distribution of LC Responses with ‘Home or Apartment Ownership’ (%)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Income (Rs.)                  35000 (HI)        15000 (MI) 7000 (LI)                Total
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Groom Caste HC                      2.50              3.75              12.50             18.75
                  MC                5.00              12.50             11.25             28.75
                  LC                21.25             15.00             16.25             52.50
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Total             28.75             31.25             40.00             100.00
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Number of responses = 80; Percentage of LC responses = 30


                                                   46
Figure 1 Distribution of Groom Income from the Collected Marriage Ads




                                      47
